Revise bandwidth reduction page with cellular measurements (#2476)
balena-io/docs: pages/reference/supervisor/bandwidth-reduction.md

# Reduce bandwidth usage

> balenaOS and the device Supervisor provide convenient features that make it easy to manage a device remotely, like forwarding container logs, hardware metrics reporting, and Cloudlink for on-demand external access. However, these features consume network bandwidth, and typically cellular connectivity is charged by the megabyte. To allow you to trade off between cost and features, you may configure their use individually.

Reviewer: I know you didn't want any comments on content, but shouldn't this have engine too? Or engine takes up no bandwidth?

Author: I struggled some to be comprehensive with these categories. The engine isn't involved here. It just runs what the Supervisor has provided for it.

Author: Confusion on my part; nothing further to do here.

Most of these controls are available from the fleet/device configuration tabs on the dashboard as well as via Supervisor variables. The NetworkManager connectivity check may be configured via `config.json`.

**The minimum bandwidth required is approximately 1 MB per month**, when turning off all of the features below and setting API Polling to the minimum value of once per day. These measurements were made with a Quectel modem on a SixFab HAT on a Raspberry Pi4, and using a Twilio North American SIM. See this [blog post](https://www.balena.io/blog/cellular-iot-isnt-as-hard-as-you-think/) for a similar setup. The device was running balenaOS v2.107.10 and Supervisor v14.4.4.

> | Control | Monthly Bandwidth if enabled | Variable Name<br>`BALENA_SUPERVISOR...` | Comments |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Control | Monthly Bandwidth if enabled | Variable Name| Comments |
```

Much similar to write the complete variable name @kb2ma because someone would be copying these straightup and not liking the experience.

Reviewer: Suggestion: replace `Comments` with `Use` or `description`

Author: I was trying to conserve horizontal space, but I like the practicality of your suggestion to include the full name. I'm going to try putting the variable name below the name of the feature in the leftmost cell.

| ------- | --------- | -------- | -------- |

> | Cloudlink VPN | 81 MB | ...`_VPN_CONTROL` | Bandwidth just to maintain connection |

Reviewer: Maybe add a column about essential or not? This seems like an absolute necessity to have? or structure the comment like this?

```suggestion
| Cloudlink VPN | 81 MB | ...`_VPN_CONTROL` | Maintains remote connection with the device for access |
```

This explains what it does, signifies importance, and justifies memory usage. If the user wants to disable any of these they should know the consequences as well as the effects.

Reviewer: The description I gave is an example, feel free add a better more accurate one.

Reviewer: Ahh there you go, there is a side effects section. Maybe add a oneliner above the table for the user to check the side effects as well

Author: Hopefully with more space, I can add more text in the Comments/Description cell. I agree it would help for the text to be a little higher level since each row is the first mention of the feature. At the same time I need to qualify what exactly was measured to set expectations.

| Device Metrics | 73 MB | ...`_HARDWARE_METRICS` | Minimal application activity |
| API Poll Interval, 4x hour | 28 MB | ...`_POLL_INTERVAL` | Default interval |
| Network Manager connectivity check, 1x hour | 8 MB | No variable, see [configuration][config-json] to set interval | Default interval |
| API Poll Interval, 1x day | 1 MB | ...`_POLL_INTERVAL` | Minimum interval |
| Device Logging| ?? | ...`_LOG_CONTROL` | Minimal application activity |
| Cloudlink connectivity check | N/A | ...`_CONNECTIVITY_CHECK`  | Only active when VPN is down |

> 

Reviewer: Future visions: How are we planning to keep the data updated? Do we have a test environment spun up somewhere that can keep this table updated? Reach out to us in autokit if you are looking for an automated solution to keep this table updated with OS releases. Could be helpful?

Author: I do not have a plan on how to keep the data updated. The OS team has talked about using the tool periodically to verify no regressions. This capability was another of the rationales behind the work.

Each actual variable name is prefixed with "`BALENA_SUPERVISOR`", for example `BALENA_SUPERVISOR_VPN_CONTROL`.

> You can perform these measurements yourself as well! See the Network Metrics Logger [example](https://github.com/balena-io-examples/network-metrics-logger).

Reviewer: Meta: Is it a good look for us to own the measurement tool to check our own metrics? It should be fine, if we can add a small paragraph on the "why we built this"? + If you can add alternatives that people can use to test but not as good as our checker for transparency. Showing the thinking process & what we used to build this will help the customers in the future who will be using this network logger to check their devices and find the results acceptable. 

Example: I love when my ISP can provide speed results using Ookla but I trust fast.com, ismyinternetgoodenough.com or at least some other tool to co-relate the performance.

Meta thought, feel free to skip

Author: Ultimately I think most/all tools report the statistics the networking subsystem provides, probably via `/proc`. Great idea to provide rationale. We build this to have a tool independent of the cellular provider. For example, Twilio does publish byte usage per device per hour, but you've got use its API. I did verify that our numbers match theirs really closely.

Reviewer: SGTM, i think a rationale section be great to have

**Cloudlink VPN** Defines the ability to send instantaneous updates to the device. Turning off cloudlink means that any configuration or variable update is reflected only when the device polls for these changes. The Web Terminal does not function when cloudlink is disabled. This also disables the public URL functionality.

**Device Metrics** [Device metrics][device-metrics] such as CPU temperature and memory usage won't be reported to the API, and won't be displayed on the summary page of the device dashboard.

**API Poll Interval** Defines the time interval between device checks for updates to the fleet, for example new code pushes, environment variables changes, or cloudlink control changes for the device. If cloudlink is disabled, lengthening this interval increases the latency of propagating these updates to the device.

**NetworkManager connectivity check** ??? What happens if it fails?

**Device Logging** Any logs written by the user container or the device Agent are not sent to the dashboard when this variable is set to false.

**Cloudlink connectivity check** Defines the device's ability to test and indicate (via an LED when available) that it has issues with connectivity.

> 

Reviewer: In the end, I might like to see a section on how to apply these using the dashboard and SV API. You can either link to docs for both or write a sample request. Your choice. 

My recommendation would be the former and it will be a clear CTA

Author: Cool; again I appreciate the practical approach.

> 

Reviewer: Could we also add a section to recommend users to use our Metrics block to check bandwidth usage if they want. Could be a good pitch to use it on their fleet or at least some devices?

Shows that we trust our results and look forward to more data to improve this? What say

Author: I'm a little confused here. I did suggest above that users verify for themselves. The linked project uses the Metrics block from Hub.

> You can perform these measurements yourself as well!

Reviewer: That is true @kb2ma Yeah, let's leave this one out. Since there is a getting started section on the network tool

# Reduce bandwidth usage

balenaOS and the device Supervisor make it easy to manage a device remotely with features like forwarding container logs, hardware metrics reporting, and Cloudlink for on-demand external access. However these features consume network bandwidth, and typically cellular providers  charge by the megabyte. So to trade off between cost and features, you may configure their use individually.

To help you understand the costs, we measured data use over a cellular connection for features that require network transfer. **The minimum bandwidth required is approximately 1 MB per month** for balenaOS v2.108.18 and Supervisor v14.4.4, when all of the features in the table below are turned off and API Polling is set to the minimum value of once per day.

> You may control these features from the fleet/device configuration tabs on the dashboard and as device variables. See the dashboard [docs][device-configuration] and the Configuration List [page][configuration-list]. Below the table we describe our measurement tool so you can repeat the tests.  Finally, be sure to read the [Side Effects](#side-effects--warnings) section for the impact of turning off each feature, particularly Cloudlink VPN.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may control these features from the fleet/device configuration tabs on the dashboard and as device variables. See the dashboard [docs][device-configuration] and the Configuration List [page][configuration-list]. Below the table we describe our measurement tool so you can repeat the tests.  Finally, be sure to read the [Side Effects](#side-effects--warnings) section for the impact of turning off each feature, particularly Cloudlink.
```

Author: Thanks @dfunckt , I have removed "VPN" from references to Cloudlink.

| Feature / Variable Name | Monthly Bandwidth if enabled | Measurement Notes |
| ------- | --------- | -------- |

> | Cloudlink VPN<br>`BALENA_SUPERVISOR_VPN_CONTROL` | 80 MB | No use of VPN, just bandwidth required to maintain the connection  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Cloudlink<br>`BALENA_SUPERVISOR_VPN_CONTROL` | 80 MB | No use of VPN, just bandwidth required to maintain the connection  |
```

Your bandwidth measurements may vary based on hardware, location or cellular provider, but we expect them to be comparable. Of course your own app may add to network use. We encourage you to measure with your own device and workload! It's easy to deploy the Network Metrics Logger.

We wrote Network Metrics Logger to provide a generic, client-side tool to measure bandwidth. It uses the NodeJS system information [library](https://systeminformation.io/), which in turn reads network statistics from `/sys/class/net/{iface}/statistics`. Twilio provides a nice interface to their server-side statistics, but we wanted a tool that works across providers.

## Side Effects / Warnings

> **Cloudlink** Provides the ability to send instantaneous updates to the device. Turning off cloudlink has several downsides: (1) configuration and variable updates are delayed by the device API polling interval; (2) CLI access is disabled via the web terminal or SSH; (3) device's public URL is not accessible. To be clear, you can re-enable Cloudlink via API or console after turning it off. However you must wait for the next API poll from the device before the link is re-established.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Cloudlink** allows the device to be instantly notified of state changes. Turning off Cloudlink has several consequences:

- CLI access via the web terminal or SSH is disabled.
- Updates to configuration, environment variables and other state are not picked up by the device immediately, but are delayed instead until the next time the device polls the API.
- The Device Public URL feature is not available.

You can re-enable Cloudlink via API or console after turning it off. The device will re-establish the link the next time it polls the API.
```

------

Also, what do you mean with "via API or console"? Can you please elaborate as I don't think it's clear to the reader.

Author: Just changed that to "dashboard", which works better for Cloudlink.

> **Cloudlink VPN** Provides the ability to send instantaneous updates to the device. Turning off cloudlink has several downsides: (1) configuration and variable updates are delayed by the device API polling interval; (2) CLI access is disabled via the web terminal or SSH; (3) device's public URL is not accessible. To be clear, you can re-enable Cloudlink via API or console after turning it off. However you must wait for the next API poll from the device before the link is re-established.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Cloudlink** Provides the ability to send instantaneous updates to the device. Turning off cloudlink has several downsides: (1) configuration and variable updates are delayed by the device API polling interval; (2) CLI access is disabled via the web terminal or SSH; (3) device's public URL is not accessible. To be clear, you can re-enable Cloudlink via API or console after turning it off. However you must wait for the next API poll from the device before the link is re-established.
```

> **Device Metrics** [Device metrics][device-metrics] such as CPU temperature and memory usage won't be reported to the API if turned off, and so won't be displayed on the summary page of the device dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**Device Metrics**][device-metrics] controls whether metrics such as CPU temperature and memory usage, are reported to the API and made available for inspection on the summary page of the device dashboard. If turned off, apart from the network bandwidth savings, the respective section on the dashboard is hidden.
```

> **API Poll Interval** Defines the time interval between device checks for updates to the fleet, for example new code pushes, environment variables changes, or cloudlink control changes for the device. If Cloudlink is disabled, lengthening this interval increases the latency of propagating these updates to the device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**API Poll Interval** defines the time interval between device checks for updates to the fleet, for example new code pushes, environment variables changes, or Cloudlink control changes for the device. If Cloudlink is disabled, lengthening this interval increases the latency of propagating these updates to the device.
```

> **NetworkManager connectivity check** When enabled for devices with multiple network interfaces, NetworkManager uses routing metrics to avoid use of an interface that fails the check. This adaptability is crucial to retain connectivity. However for a single network interface, NetworkManager can provide only interface status from the check via DBus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NetworkManager connectivity check**, when enabled for devices with multiple network interfaces, instructs NetworkManager to use routing metrics to avoid using an interface that fails the check. This adaptability is crucial to retain connectivity. However for a single network interface, NetworkManager can provide only interface status from the check via DBus.
```

> **Device Logging** Any logs written by the user container or the balena system are not sent to the dashboard when this variable is set to false.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Device Logging** controls whether logs written by your application or components of balenaOS are sent to the dashboard or not.
```

> **Cloudlink connectivity check** Defines the device's ability to test and indicate (via an LED when available) that it has issues with connectivity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Cloudlink connectivity check** defines the device's ability to test and indicate (via an LED when available) that it has issues with connectivity.
```
